Building the Hugging Face Remote MCP Server Blog (#2941)
huggingface/blog: hf-mcp-remote.md

---
title: "Building the Hugging Face MCP Server" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/hf-mcp-remote/hf-mcp-remote.png
authors:
- user: evalstate
- user: julien-c
- user: coyotte508
- user: abidlabs
---

# Building the Hugging Face MCP Server

> [!TIP]
> **tldr;** The Hugging Face Official MCP Server offers unique customization options for AI Assistants accessing the Hub, along with access to 1000's of AI applications through one simple URL. We used MCPs "Streamable HTTP" transport for deployment, and examine in detail the trade-offs that Server Developers have.

## Introduction

The Model Context Protocol (MCP) is fulfilling its promise of being the standard to connect AI Assistants to the outside world. 

> At Hugging Face, providing access to the Hub via MCP is an obvious choice, and this article shares some of our experience developing the `hf.co/mcp` MCP Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Hugging Face, providing access to the Hub via MCP is an obvious choice, and this article shares our experience developing the `hf.co/mcp` MCP Server.
```

## Design Choices

> The community uses the Hub for a wide range of tasks including Research, Development, Content Creation and more. We wanted to let people customise the Server for their own needs as well as easily access 1000s of AI Applications available on Spaces. This meant making the MCP Server dynamic - adjusting the Tools offered for each User on the fly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The community uses the Hub for research, development, content creation and more. We wanted to let people customize the server for their own needs, as well as easily access 1000s of AI applications available on Spaces. This meant making the MCP Server dynamic by adjusting users' tools on the fly.
```

> We also wanted to make access simple - avoiding complicated downloads and configuration - so making it remotely accessible via a simple URL was a must.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also wanted to make access simple by avoiding complicated downloads and configuration, so making it remotely accessible via a simple URL was a must.
```

## Remote Servers

When building a remote MCP Server, the first decision is deciding how Clients will connect to it.  MCP offers several transport options, with different trade-offs.

> Since its launch in November 2024, MCP has undergone rapid evolution with 3 protocol revisions in 9 months. This has seen the replacement of the SSE Transport with Streamable HTTP, as well as the introduction, then rework of Authorization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since its launch in November 2024, MCP has undergone rapid evolution with 3 protocol revisions in 9 months. This has seen the replacement of the SSE Transport with Streamable HTTP, as well as the introduction and rework of authorization.
```

An additional factor to consider is whether or not the MCP Server itself needs to maintain state for each connection. This is decided by the Server when the Client sends its Initialize request:

| | Stateless | Stateful |
|---|-----------|----------|
| **Session IDs** | Not needed | Required (`mcp-session-id` header) |
| **What it means** | Each request is independent | Server maintains client context |
| **Scaling** | Simple horizontal scaling: any instance can handle any request | Need session affinity or shared state mechanisms |
| **Resumption** | Not needed | May replay messages for broken connections |

> [!TIP]
> The [Hugging Face MCP Server](https://github.com/evalstate/hf-mcp-server) is Open Source - and supports STDIO, SSE and Streamable HTTP deployment in both Direct Response and Server Push mode. You can configure keep-alive and last activity timeouts when using Server Push Streams. There's also a built in observability dashboard that you can use to understand how different Clients manage connections, and handle Tool List change notifications.

> SCREENSHOT Show connection dashboard here

> Here is a summary of MCP Features require which communication patterns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an overview of MCP Features required by communication patterns:
```

| Tool Progress Notification | -                            | Y                                      | N        |

With Request Scoped streams, Sampling and Elicitation requests require a Stateful connection for response association.

### Production Deployment

For production, we decided to launch our MCP Server with Streamable HTTP in a stateless, Direct Response configuration for the following reasons:

**Stateless** For anonymous Users we use the a standard set of Tools for using the Hub as well as an Image Generator. For authenticated Users our state comprises their [selected tools](https://huggingface.co/settings/mcp) and chosen Gradio endpoints. We also make sure that ZeroGPU quota is correctly applied for the account. This is managed using the supplied `HF_TOKEN` or OAuth credentials that we can lookup on request. None of our existing Tools require us to maintain any other state between requests.

> [!TIP]
> You can use OAuth login by adding `?login` to the MCP Server url - e.g. `https://huggingface.co/mcp?login`. This may become the default once `claude.ai` remote integration supports the latest OAuth spec.

> **Direct Response** This provides the lowest deployment resource overhead - and we don't currently have any Tools that require Sampling or Elicitation during execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Direct Response** This provides the lowest deployment resource overhead and we don't currently have any Tools that require Sampling or Elicitation during execution.
```

> **Future Support** At launch, the "HTTP with SSE" transport was still the remote default in a lot of MCP Clients - however we didn't want to invest heavily in managing it due to it's imminent deprecation. Fortunately popular clients had already started making the switch (VSCode and Cursor), and within a week of launch `claude.ai` also added support. If you need to connect with SSE, feel free to deploy a copy of our Server on a [FreeCPU Hugging Face Space](https://huggingface.co/new-space).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Future Support** At launch, the "HTTP with SSE" transport was still the remote default in a lot of MCP Clients. However we didn't want to invest heavily in managing it due to it's imminent deprecation. Fortunately popular clients had already started making the switch (VSCode and Cursor), and within a week of launch `claude.ai` also added support. If you need to connect with SSE, feel free to deploy a copy of our Server on a [FreeCPU Hugging Face Space](https://huggingface.co/new-space).
```

> 

Reviewer: The text is about a reflection from production, so I think it should be moved into the next section.

```suggestion

### In Production Reflections

```

> One thing we would like to support are real-time Tool List Changed notifications when people update their settings on the Hub - however this raises a couple of practical issues. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Tool List Change Notifications

In the future, we would like to support real-time Tool List Changed notifications when people update their settings on the Hub. However, this raises a couple of practical issues:
```

First, users tend to configure their favourite MCP Servers in their Client and leave them enabled. This means that the Client will connect whilst the application is open. To send notifications this would mean maintaining as many open connections as there were currently active Clients - regardless of active usage - on the chance the User may change their tool configuration. 

Second, most MCP Servers and Clients disconnect after a period of inactivity, resuming when necessary. This inevitably means that immediate push notifications will be missed - as the notification channel will have been closed. In practice, it is far simpler to simpler for the Client to refresh the connection and Tool List as needed.

Unless you have reasonable control over the Client/Server pair, using **Server Push Streams** adds a lot of complexity to a public deployment, when lower-resource solutions for refreshing the Tool List exist.

> ### In Production Reflections

Reviewer: Following above, I would start this section earlier.

```suggestion
```

---
title: "Building the Hugging Face MCP Server" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/hf-mcp-remote/hf-mcp-remote.png
authors:
- user: evalstate
- user: julien-c
- user: coyotte508
- user: abidlabs
---

# Building the Hugging Face MCP Server

> [!TIP]

> > **tldr;** The Hugging Face Official MCP Server offers unique customization options for AI Assistants accessing the Hub, along with access to 1000's of AI applications through one simple URL. We used MCPs "Streamable HTTP" transport for deployment, and examine in detail the trade-offs that Server Developers have.

Reviewer 2: also `1000's` -> `thousands`

## Introduction

The Model Context Protocol (MCP) is fulfilling its promise of being the standard to connect AI Assistants to the outside world. 

At Hugging Face, providing access to the Hub via MCP is an obvious choice, and this article shares our experience developing the `hf.co/mcp` MCP Server.

> ## Design Choices

Reviewer 3: could we maybe recycle one of the videos of hf.co/mcp server in action here

Both `STDIO` and `HTTP with SSE` are fully bi-directional by default - meaning that Client and Server maintain an open connection and can send messages to each other at any time. 

#### Understanding Streamable HTTP

> [!TIP]
> SSE refers to "Server Sent Events" - a way for HTTP Servers to maintain an open connection and send events in response to a request.

MCP Server Developers face lots of choices when setting up the new Streamable HTTP transport.

With Streamable HTTP there are 3 main communication patterns to choose from:

- **Direct Response** Simple Request/Response (like standard REST APIs). This is perfect for straightforward, stateless operations like simple searches.
- **Request Scoped Streams** Temporary SSE Streams associated with a single Request. This is useful for sending [Progress Updates](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/utilities/progress) if the Tool Call takes a long time - such as Video Generation. Alternatively the Server may need to request information from the User with an [Elicitation](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/client/elicitation), or conduct a Sampling request.

> - **Server Push Streams** Long-lived SSE connection supporting server-initiated messages. This enables Resource, Tool and Prompt List change notifications or ad-hoc Sampling and Elicitations. This connections needs extra management such as [keep-alive](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/utilities/ping) and resumption mechanics on re-connection. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Server Push Streams** Long-lived SSE connection supporting server-initiated messages. This enables Resource, Tool and Prompt List change notifications or ad-hoc Sampling and Elicitations. These connections need extra management such as [keep-alive](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/utilities/ping) and resumption mechanics on re-connection. 
```

With Request Scoped streams, Sampling and Elicitation requests require a Stateful connection for response association.

> [!TIP]
> The [Hugging Face MCP Server](https://github.com/evalstate/hf-mcp-server) is Open Source - and supports STDIO, SSE and Streamable HTTP deployment in both Direct Response and Server Push mode. You can configure keep-alive and last activity timeouts when using Server Push Streams. There's also a built in observability dashboard that you can use to understand how different Clients manage connections, and handle Tool List change notifications.

Here is an example of the Connection Dashboard running in "Server Push" Streamable HTTP mode:

<figure class="image text-center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hf-mcp-remote/hf-mcp-connections.png" alt="The Hugging Face MCP Server Connection Dashboard">
  <figcaption>The Hugging Face MCP Server Connection Dashboard.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Production Deployment

For production, we decided to launch our MCP Server with Streamable HTTP in a stateless, Direct Response configuration for the following reasons:

> **Stateless** For anonymous Users we use the a standard set of Tools for using the Hub as well as an Image Generator. For authenticated Users our state comprises their [selected tools](https://huggingface.co/settings/mcp) and chosen Gradio endpoints. We also make sure that ZeroGPU quota is correctly applied for the account. This is managed using the supplied `HF_TOKEN` or OAuth credentials that we can lookup on request. None of our existing Tools require us to maintain any other state between requests.

Author: yes - bad habit of mine, much better, thank you!
